---
layout: post
---

## Course Info

- Instructor: [Max Willsey](https://mwillsey.com)
- Time: Mon/Wed 14:30-16:00
- Room: Soda 405

**Please take the [pre-course survey ASAP](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdQTYnypi4wtiIMCc8cctW0KTjlcqMbIhyPMySda36L5APyEg/viewform?usp=sf_link)!**

Welcome! The purpose of this course is to get exposure
 to some of the various declarative techniques 
 for program analysis and optimization.
We will study term rewriting systems, datalog, and equality saturation.
One major theme is that these techniques share many common through-lines,
 despite their apparent differences.

## Grading

This class consists partly of lectures, and partly paper discussions.
Attendance, reading of assigned papers, 
 and participation are essential for this course
 to be useful and enjoyable, so the grading reflects that.

- 30% Participation
- 30% Discussion Lead
- 40% Final Project / Presentation

## Paper Discussion

Each discussion will be led by a small group of students, the discussion leads.
The leads will be responsible for:

- Reading the **entire paper** well-ahead of time.
  - You will only be lead a couple times during the course,
    so really diving into the paper is important.
  - Use all the resources at your disposal to understand the paper, 
    including your co-leads, the instructor, other references, 
    and the fact that you can start reading the paper well-ahead of time.
- Preparing a **reading guide** for the paper and submitting it to this website.
  - The reading guide should be a short document (1-2 pages)
    that summarizes the paper and highlights the most important points,
    as well helps the everyone else effectively read the paper in **1-2 hours**.
  - The reading guide should include a few **discussion questions**.
    - Class discussion is not limited to these of course,
      but they should help guide the readers as they go through the paper.
  - The reading guide is due **48 hours** before the discussion begins
    via pull request to this repository.
    - Go to the page for your discussion and click 
      the "Edit this page" link in the footer to create a pull request.
  - The reading guide should also point to any other resources
    useful for understanding the paper (e.g. other papers, blog posts, presentations, etc.), 
    or that could be good jumping-off points for a project.

If you are not the lead, 
 you still must read the paper and the reading guide
 before the discussion begins.
You may of course start reading the paper early,
 but you may not have access to the reading guide
 until 48 hours before the discussion.

## Projects

The final project is an opportunity to explore a topic of your choice
 related to the course material.
You may work in pairs or by yourself,
 either is totally fine.

The project is meant to be flexible and open-ended,
 here are some ways that you might approach it:

- Re-implement or extend a tool from a paper
- Perform a survey on a few papers in a deeper area than we got a chance to cover in class
- Apply some of the ideas from the course to your own research
- Anything else!

### Proposals

After spring break, 
 groups will present 
 a short presentation on their project proposal
 as well as submit a short writeup.

### Meetings

A large chunk of the course is dedicated to the final project.
During that time,
 each group will meet with me weekly to discuss their progress.
These meetings are an opportunity to get early feedback on your project,
 and to help hone in the scope of your project
 so that you can make the best presentation by the end of the course.

### Presentations and Report

The final deliverables for the project are:
- A 20ish minute presentation given during the last week of class
- A short report (4-6 pages) due before the first day of project presentations
  - Report length should vary based on the kind of project. 
    For example, a survey report should be longer than that of an implementation project.

    
