---
layout: post
lead: Jiwon, Altan
paper: "https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.11573"
title: "Slog: Higher-Order, Data-Parallel Structured Deduction"
---

# Slog Reading Guide

## Summary
This paper presents Slog, an extension of Datalog to higher-order relations, as
well as a runtime system for massively parallel execution of Slog programs.
The key difference between Slog and regular Datalog is native support for
recursive/nested facts, which is especially useful for implementing various
reduction systems. This is achieved by aggressively interning terms (c.f.
hash consing), together with special handling of the equality relation.
Slog's runtime system is essentially a parallel relational algebra engine,
utilizing distributed hash joins with additional optimizations (including a new
improvement in all-to-all communication by many of the same authors).
Finally, Slog is evaluated on a variety of program analysis tasks, and shows
good scalability under a massively parallel context.

## Extending Datalog to Higher-Order Relations
The main motivation of Slog is to enable reasoning over (tree-structured) terms.
Per the paper, to encode the term `(lam "x" (ref "x"))`, one needs to "flatten"
the term into something of the form
```
(= lam-id (lam "x" ref-id))
(= ref-id (ref "x"))
```
It's worth noting here that this is essentially the
[A-normal form](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A-normal_form) for functional
languages, which is also related to continuation-passing style (CPS).

Formally, Slog (DL\_S) extends Datalog by letting the Herbrand base be an
inductively defined set, rather than a finite set of values. The paper gives
the example of natural numbers, which can be encoded by
```
V = {0} U {(succ v) | v in V}.
```
Then, when determining the truth value of a Slog rule under a given
interpretation, the variables in the rule may be substituted with any (compound)
terms from V, rather than just literals. This adds an additional layer of
recursion to Datalog.

## Slog's Syntactic Sugar (and Further Extensions)
Slog provides syntactic sugar for interacting with the interning indices.
For example, to simultaneously bind a term (with free variables) and refer to
it in another rule, one can use the `?` syntax:
```
(free ?(ref x) x) ~> [(= e-id (ref x)) --> (free e-id x)].
```

Slog also allows for disjunctions in the body, unlike Datalog which defines
unions of conjunctive queries separately. This lets free variables from the
branches to appear jointly in the head, as shown in the example
```
(or (free Ef x) (free Ea x)) --> (free ?(app Ef Ea) x).
```

Finally, Slog enables on-demand fact generation through the `!` syntax, which
produces facts when the surrounding rule is sufficiently satisfied.
Slog can also support functions through the `{}` syntax.

## Evaluation and Implementation
This is a very dense section of the paper, so we won't dive too much into the
details as it requires a good chunk of PL, HPC, and databases background.
Instead, we provide references for the interested reader.

The conclusion of this section is that Slog is able to implement a good variety
of program analyses previously impractical or impossible to implement in pure
Datalog. Additionally, the implementation is able to scale to thousands of threads,
due to highly optimized parallel relational algebra and communication primitives.

### Evaluation
* [Abstract Machines](https://www.inf.ed.ac.uk/teaching/courses/lsi/diehl_abstract_machines.pdf)
* [Abstracting Abstract Machines](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/1863543.1863553)
* Type Systems: [TAPL](https://www.cis.upenn.edu/~bcpierce/tapl/)

### Implementation
* [Optimized Bruck Algorithm](https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/3502181.3531468)
* [Parallel Hash Join](https://faculty.cc.gatech.edu/~jarulraj/courses/4420-f20/slides/24-parallel-hash-join.pdf)

## Reading/Discussion Questions
* Slog seems to allow nonterminating programs.
  - Is this ever useful for Slog programs? (c.f. egraph might never saturate...)
  - If not, is there a reasonable way to prevent it from happening?
    (halting problem...)
* How does Slog relate to egglog? Both seem to treat equality specially, and
  do hash consing.
* How does the `!` operator actually work?



See also:
- [Algebraic Data Types for Object-oriented Datalog](https://codeql.github.com/publications/algebraic-data-types.pdf), used in Github's [CodeQL](https://codeql.github.com/) system.
- The chase, datalog+-, existential rules, and other extensions to datalog.
